cat Arizona bat.
SAN ANTONIO — P. J. Carlesimo spent five happy years with the San Antonio Spurs , long enough to win three championships and gain a few insights into one of the most successful franchises of the modern era.

He also learned a certain adage, one he shared last week, on his first day as the Nets’ interim coach: the Spurs, Carlesimo noted, are the sort of team that always seems to be in reach, and then suddenly is not. Opponents walk away shaking their heads, thinking they almost had them.

That moment arrived much too early on Monday night. The Nets trailed by 3 points late in the first half, giving the momentary impression of a competitive game. By halftime, the margin was 8. By the end of a disastrous third quarter, it was 33.

The gap between the Nets and the N.B.A. elite never looked so colossal, so unbridgeable, as it did in a 104-73 rout by the Spurs.

The Nets (16-15) scored 5 points in the third quarter, a franchise record low. They made just 2 of 20 shots in the period, turned the ball over seven times and played defense with equal ineptitude.

“Abominable,” said Carlesimo, who had a much better time here as a Spurs assistant than as the Nets’ interim head coach.

So despite a $330 million roster overhaul, a change in ZIP codes, a new arena and a recent change in coach, the Nets closed 2012 much as they began it: looking hapless and lost.

“I think we’re a little out of whack right now as a group,” Deron Williams said. “I know I am individually.”

Williams was the only Net to score in the third quarter, on a jumper, a layup and a free throw, going 2 for 6 from the field while his teammates were 0 for 14. Yet he still turned in his worst game of the season, finishing with 8 points while going 3 for 11 from the field, with an assist.

Afterward, Williams struck a familiar pose in the locker room, with his feet in a bucket of ice and ice packs on both knees and his chronically sore right wrist. He turned his right ankle early in the game, another seemingly nightly occurrence. When reporters dispersed, he closed his eyes and covered half of his face with his left hand.

It was Williams’s signature in July that was supposed to herald a new start for this franchise. But he was as responsible as anyone for the Nets’ sickly 5-11 record in December, which included four double-digit losses in the last two weeks.

“I got to play better, I got to find ways to get going,” Williams said. “Even on bad nights, I don’t play like this. It doesn’t even feel like it’s me out there on the court. I just got to snap out of it.”

Williams continued: “I put a lot of pressure on myself early. I was really excited about this year. Coming into the season, I felt like we had a great team. I still feel like we have a great team. And I want to be able to help the team more and play better. Tonight is just another night I didn’t help.”

Nor did he do much of anything to contain the Spurs’ Tony Parker, who diced up the Nets’ defense for 20 points and 6 assists in just 26 minutes. Tim Duncan added 15 points, outplaying Brook Lopez (11 points).

The Spurs (25-8) won their sixth game in a row and handed Carlesimo his first defeat since he replaced Avery Johnson last week. Coach Gregg Popovich was able to rest all of his starters in the fourth quarter, without any fear of a fine from the commissioner’s office.

The Nets played without their best defender, Gerald Wallace, who has a bruised left knee, but their problems ran much deeper.

“It was tough to even watch,” said Joe Johnson, who finished with 12 points.

He added, “We shot ourselves in the foot in the third quarter.” But that seemed unlikely since they clearly would have missed.

The Nets have not won a game in San Antonio since January 2002, a span of 11 games, dating to the season before Carlesimo became a Spurs assistant.

The night began with a kind embrace, Carlesimo meeting Popovich, his close friend and former dining partner, near midcourt. Popovich earlier admitted some feelings of awkwardness, having also served as a mentor to Avery Johnson.

Reacting to Johnson’s sudden firing last week, Popovich said, “It sort of shows what a fickle, volatile business we’re in.” He declined to elaborate Monday, but when asked if 30 games were enough for new team to find its stride, Popovich did not hesitate.

Gregg Popovich offered an unusual, mostly complimentary appraisal of the Nets’ Brook Lopez. “He’s a strange one at that position,” he said before the game. “You look at him, he looks awkward. And you look again, you go, ‘Man, he’s also huge.’ And you look again, you say, ‘He’s also kind of quick, and he gets from A to B. And you look again, you say he’s competitive. He just doesn’t look like that fine-tuned, N.B.A., skilled guy that comes out of the cookie cutter. He’s just all over the place. He creates problems, because he can guard, he can score and so they got a good combination.” ... Kris Humphries returned to the rotation after missing four games to recover from a mild abdominal strain.
