EVANSTON, Ill.  From the sidelines at a recent practice, Northwestern Coach Pat Fitzgerald looked as if he could have been a player. Fitzgerald, a baby-faced 38-year-old, wore a black, long-sleeved T-shirt and black shorts that revealed muscular calves. He was a bundle of energy, sprinting from player to player during drills, bumping chests and shouting encouragement. Only his clipboard and whistle gave him away.

I think I have A.D.D., but Im not diagnosed, Fitzgerald said, referring to attention deficit disorder.

His players do not seem to mind.

Fitz has more fun than anyone, linebacker Damien Proby said. And it rubs off on the players. Thats the kind of program hes built here.

Fitzgeralds Wildcats (9-3) will meet Mississippi State in the Gator Bowl on New Years Day, their fifth straight bowl appearance. Despite Northwesterns having won none of them, it marks an achievement for a program that won little of anything for the better part of the 20th century. The Wildcats have lost nine consecutive bowl games, a drought that dates to the teams lone bowl win: the Rose Bowl on Jan. 1, 1949.

But as Fitzgerald leads a program that has now tasted success, his task has grown beyond establishing Northwestern as respectable. His job has become building a Big Ten power. The next rung on the climb is a bowl win.

We want to be champions, and we havent accomplished it yet, Fitzgerald said.

When Northwestern lost its 29th straight game in 1981, setting a Football Bowl Subdivision record, students tore down the goal posts and chanted, Were the worst. Perhaps no individual has played a greater role in Northwesterns journey from doormat to credibility than Fitzgerald.

He was a linebacker on the surprising 1995-96 team, which broke the universitys 47-year bowl drought and reached the Rose Bowl, where it lost to Southern California. He was a two time all-American and a two-time winner of the Bronko Nagurski Trophy, given to college footballs best defensive player, and he is in the sports Hall of Fame. In 2006, he was named the coach of Northwestern after Randy Walker died of a heart attack.

Fitzgerald grew up in Chicagos south suburbs, an Irish Roman Catholic with one university in mind, and it was not in Evanston.

The only school I ever heard about was the one in South Bend, Fitzgerald said, referring to Notre Dame.

But it was Northwestern and its coach at the time, Gary Barnett, who wanted Fitzgerald.

We needed him more than Notre Dame did, said Barnett, now a college football analyst for Sports USA Radio.

Fitzgerald broke his leg ahead of the Rose Bowl that his team played in, and in his office hangs the jersey he wore on the sideline. Inside the frame are a pin and screw that were inserted into his ankle after the injury. It was one of the first items he hung in his office when he took over the program.

The framed memento belies the secret to Fitzgeralds popularity here. His heartfelt connection to the university, in addition to his buoyant personality, has made him the face of the football program and a beloved figure.

You see the carousel of coaches going into new teams, who have no clue of the culture of the school or the community, or the tradition of what its taken to get to that point, Fitzgerald said. When you look at all these changes, it doesnt equal success. I get it here.

Barnett said: Its the entire community. Hes one of theirs, he stayed at home, turned the whole culture around. You cant have a bigger hero.

Last year, Fitzgerald signed a 10-year contract extension that runs through 2020, and he is every bit the players coach he appears to be. He created a leadership council made up of players from all classes. During one meeting this season, players said, they were feeling sluggish on game day, so Fitzgerald added nap time to that weeks travel itinerary.

Northwestern has responded to the football teams growing profile with plans unveiled in September for an estimated $220 million worth of improvements to athletic facilities. Asked if that financial commitment puts greater pressure on his program to take the next step, Fitzgerald said: No, because theyre matching my commitment now. Everybodys expectations are starting to rise to ours, and I would say its about time.

I think the minute you feel like youre secure, you get comfortable, which leads to complacency, which leads to you getting fired.

Of the impatience that seems to be endemic around college football, Barnett said: Northwestern has not traditionally fallen into that trap. Hopefully, Pats never in that situation.

Fitzgerald, with a record of 49-39 in his seven seasons at Northwestern, including a 26-30 mark in the Big Ten, is one win from becoming the coach with the most victories in program history. He would like to get it out of the way on Tuesday.

It will mean something because well have won a bowl game, Fitzgerald said. Thats the only negative left here.