One is a corporate lawyer from Southern California with few hobbies and only the mildest interest in sports. The other is a college student from Miami who is less than half his age and has amassed a stash of memorabilia that matches his love of baseball.

Yet from opposite ends of the country they share one peculiar passion: collecting trading cards of Mike Piazza in a Florida Marlins uniform.

Never mind that Piazza played just five games for the Marlins in May 1998, a mere pit stop on his way from the Los Angeles Dodgers to the Mets. Never mind that he did nothing of note during that stint, except hit his only triple of the season. The closest either man has been to Piazza is waving to him from the stands.

Yet for Jerry Dworkin, 59, and Chris Fernandez, 25, there is no greater thrill than finding one of the more than 120 Piazza Marlins cards issued from 1998 to 2005.

I cant deny it is obscure, said Dworkin, who lives in Irvine, Calif., and admitted to spending five figures to accumulate more than 100 cards. Im not a baseball expert. Im just a run-of-the-mill guy who got caught up in the oddity of the situation, someone as great as Mike Piazza being on a team for just five games.

Fernandez, who keeps 59 Piazza Marlins cards in a cigar box, was more concise: We kind of marvel at it.

Fans may marvel at their cards if Piazzas election to the Hall of Fame, in his first year of eligibility, is announced on Jan. 9. Typically, a players rookie cards get the biggest boost from Hall entry. Piazza played most of his career in Los Angeles and New York, so the cards from those years are likely to appreciate more than his Marlins cards do, collecting experts said.

Yet sports collecting is fueled by an unending flow of players who wear an endless number of uniforms and gear. And when a baseball player makes it to the Hall of Fame, some of his biggest fans will spend great sums to commemorate the moment.

Trading cards are the most obvious investments because they have been around for so long and are relatively inexpensive.

Years ago, scarcity and a players popularity drove demand. The T206 Honus Wagner issued in 1909 is the most famous card in part because few exist.

Card collecting has grown immensely since then, and manufacturers have become adept at celebrating even the most obscure achievements, including Piazzas five-game stretch for the team now known as the Miami Marlins. They recognized the peculiarity of an All-Star like Piazza being traded twice in a brief span and the potential market for his Marlins cards, and flooded the market with dozens of cards, diluting their impact.

They want to create draws for a product and will issue cards in a unique circumstance, but then beat it to death, Tom Bartsch, the editor of Sports Collectors Digest, said of the card makers. Its a tactic they use to get people to buy as much product as possible. But its also turned a lot of people off of collecting.

The flood has limited the value of the cards, most of which sell for just a few dollars on eBay and other sites. But the value of the cards is less important to Dworkin and Fernandez than the chase to complete the Piazza Marlins collection.

Dworkin saw Piazza play a few times for the Dodgers and was disappointed when he was traded. While Dworkin did not collect cards, he quickly grasped that the Piazza Marlins cards could be valuable, though he insisted that turning a profit was not his motive.

The collection as a whole has a greater value than any part, he said.

Dworkin spends a few minutes every morning browsing Web sites for baseball card traders, and he bids actively on eBay if he finds something he does not own. He has bought cards from traders as far away as Taiwan and spent months trying to buy one-of-a-kind cards, often unsuccessfully. Once, he paid a promoter about $350 to get Piazza, who rarely attends collectors shows, to sign one of his cards.

Over the years, Dworkin has found others who share his obsession, but none more so than Fernandez, who began his fixation with Piazza in April 1993. Thats when the newly minted Marlins made their debut as a franchise against the Dodgers. He recalled seeing Piazzas name on the scoreboard that day and thinking that it sounded like pizza.

Fernandez kept an eye on Piazza from afar and was ecstatic when the Marlins traded Bobby Bonilla, Gary Sheffield and three other players to the Dodgers for Piazza and Todd Zeile. But his joy was cut short when Piazza was shipped to New York in a lopsided deal.

When he was traded to the Marlins, I was happy as heck, so I went out looking for cards, Fernandez said. I found out he was traded when I got home on my birthday. I cried like an 11-year-old.

He kept collecting Piazza cards and jerseys as well as ticket stubs from four out of the five games Piazza played for the Marlins, only two of which were at home. He has scoured card shows and shops and, of course, bid for cards online.

But Fernandez was outbid with an uncanny regularity. It was only after he met Dworkin through a collectors Web site that he discovered who was besting him.

I thought Id get them cheap, but no matter what Id bid, hed win, Fernandez said. I found out Jerry was out there and he was the reason I couldnt get them. Knowing him now, I knew I was never going to win.

The two rivals shared tips about what cards were available, feeding their fixation.

It became a race: Id go hunt one down and hed grab it and vice versa, said Fernandez, who claims to have spent about $1,000 on Piazza Marlins cards. Most of the better cards Ive lost out to Jerry, but my wallet thanked me.

Despite their constant contact over the Internet, they have never met or spoken on the phone. Still, the friendship kept me going, Dworkin said.

I gained an appreciation of the collector community, he said. He was someone I could talk to about it.

Dworkin said he would love to meet Fernandez in Cooperstown if Piazza makes it into the Hall of Fame.

Given how popular Piazza was, Dworkin and Fernandez are likely to have a lot of company. Piazza has indicated that he would like to be inducted as a Met, and there is no chance of his wearing a teal and black Marlins cap.

Piazzas agent did not return calls seeking comment from his client about his time on the Marlins. But Piazza appears to see the humor in the tiny cult of fans who savor his time in Florida. At the end of the 2011 season, he accepted an invitation from the Marlins to help close out the teams tenure at Sun Life Stadium. Standing with Marlins mainstays like Sheffield and Jeff Conine, Piazza smiled and waved to the fans, including Fernandez, who wore a Piazza replica jersey to the stadium that day.

You could see on the JumboTron that he appreciated the joke, Fernandez said.