ORTLEY BEACH, N.J.  Stefanie Pypers last prehurricane memory of her house on Fourth Avenue is one of bliss: the bike ride up to the Lavallette Boardwalk, seeing a school of dolphins in the ocean, the oasis of calm amid the turmoil of raising five children ranging in age from 8 to 18.

So after Hurricane Sandy devastated its ground floor, ruining everything inside, and turned the yard into a landfill  littering it with a Porta-Potty, a refrigerator, a television, pieces of the Ortley Beach Boardwalk and the rest  all she could think when she came back to begin cleaning up was that this is like being in mourning, this feels like a death.

And then Hurricane Sandy gave way to Sandy Hook Elementary, where the death was all too real and the mourning was for 6- and 7-year-olds and beloved educators, not for a treasured beach house and good times with good friends.

Its not that disaster is a game of perverse one-upmanship where the greater catastrophe cancels out one not quite as awful. But, still, after that, it was hard for Ms. Pyper not to see Ortleys disaster through the lens of the disaster in Newtown, Conn.

It put a whole different spin on life in general and on what were going through, said Ms. Pyper, a former fourth-grade teacher in the Newark schools. Of course, this is terrible, but we can take a deep breath and say this will get done. Those people are not going to see their kids again. To see what theyre going through, it humbles you.

Ortley was perhaps the hardest-hit beach town in New Jersey, with virtually all 2,400 homes damaged, about 10 percent of them destroyed. And while residents and businesses are slowly returning home in Seaside Heights to the south and Lavallette to the north, there is still no electricity, gas or water in any homes or businesses in Ortley Beach.

There were deaths in Hurricane Sandy, of course  none in Ortley Beach, but more than 100 elsewhere in New Jersey, in New York and in Connecticut, including little children snatched from their mothers arms  caused by the winds and a great storm surge.

But natures wrath over a broad area seems at least comprehensible.

Maria Muscarella spent New Years last year at the beach house her parents, Anthony and Raffaela Muscarella, bought in 1963.

Mr. Muscarella, a Newark firefighter who lovingly built up the small bungalow year by year, expanding the first floor and adding a second in 1979, died in 1996. Marias brother, also named Anthony, and mother lived there year-round before the storm flooded it with five feet of water.

So on Dec. 31, 2011, there was dinner at Hemingways Cafe in Seaside Heights with her brother and the Watsons from across the street. They all rang in the new year together and had a traditional Italian dinner the next day at the Muscarella home, a celebration of family, friendship and things that seemed eternal, like the gathering every Memorial Day to kick off the summer.

They plan to rebuild, but it wont be by Memorial Day.

For now, Raffaela Muscarella, 86, is living with Maria in Maplewood, and Anthony is with a friend in Toms River.

But the carnage in Newtown put their own loss in a different light.

There really isnt any comparison, Maria Muscarella said. We lost things and we can replace those things. They lost children and lives. Those are irreplaceable.

On Fourth Avenue on a recent Thursday, there was not a soul around, just the wreckage, the sea breeze and the forlorn Christmas tableau at the Politis house  its front ripped off, showing a tattered American flag, a Christmas wreath under lifeless ceiling fans and a sad-eyed concrete angel alone on a table.

But up on the main drag of Route 35, there are now traffic lights blinking orange and red. You can get sandwiches, cappuccino and cigars at the Quik Stop in Lavallette. In Seaside Heights, two of the familiar businesses, Ryans Deli and Steaks Unlimited, reopened the week before Christmas.

At Steaks Unlimited, the areas most famous habitus were strutting and preening their way through an episode of Jersey Shore on two flat-screen televisions, a dopey reminder amid devastation of the sublime appeal of everyday life in all its glory and banality. At the Jersey Shore, if not in Newtown, it still seemed within reach.