Even by the tumultuous standards of the end of an N.F.L. season, this Monday  Black Monday, as it is annually called  stood out.

The conclusion of the regular season always signals the start of a whirlwind of firings and job searches involving coaches and top executives, while only 12 teams prepare for the playoffs. This season, though, brought sweeping, swift change even to some of the most stable and patient  maybe too patient  teams in the N.F.L. Seven coaches and five general managers were fired before lunchtime in a day unequaled for its turmoil in recent memory.

The Philadelphia Eagles ended Andy Reids 14-year tenure, drawing the curtain on a tear-stained season that began with the death of Reids son during training camp and continued with a week-by-week watch of how the teams won-lost ledger matched up with the owner Jeffrey Luries preseason edict that Reid had to do better than 8-8 to keep his job. Philadelphia ended up 4-12. In Chicago, Lovie Smith was fired after nine seasons despite finishing 10-6.

In San Diego, Norv Turner, his dismissal expected almost from the day he got the job six years ago, was finally fired, along with General Manager A. J. Smith, who had held his post for almost 10 years. The same fate befell Coach Ken Whisenhunt in Arizona, who was fired after six seasons. Reid, Lovie Smith and Whisenhunt had taken their teams to the Super Bowl in the past; Turner led the Chargers to the A.F.C. Championship game.

All, though, had lost of late. And the reason for their ousters was summed up neatly by the leagues newest owner, Jimmy Haslam of the Cleveland Browns, who fired his coach, Pat Shurmur, and general manager, Tom Heckert.

It might be a little unfair of me to put that pressure on that new head coach already, but the way the N.F.L. operates, there is relative parity, Haslam said. And you can turn things around quickly.

Three teams that combined won only 10 games last year qualified for the playoffs this season: the Indianapolis Colts, the Washington Redskins and the Minnesota Vikings. Every owner wants that result. And they want it now.

Among others who were fired: Chan Gailey, after three seasons in Buffalo, and Romeo Crennel, after just one full season in Kansas City, which won two games and has the first pick in the spring draft. Scott Pioli, the Chiefs general manager, retained his job for now, the owner Clark Hunt said. But other general managers were not so lucky. Those fired, in addition to Smith and Heckert: Mike Tannenbaum of the Jets, Gene Smith of the Jacksonville Jaguars and Rod Graves of the Cardinals. The Carolina Panthers fired Marty Hurney during the season and have yet to replace him.

The speed with which so many top people were sent packing was breathtaking, but not surprising. Owners want to grab top candidates, like Chip Kelly of the University of Oregon, before anyone else, and give their new coaches time to assemble staffs of top assistants. The Browns, for instance, said they would hire a coach first and then a player personnel executive. That is an unorthodox arrangement but a signal that they are very likely pursuing a candidate others will want and that he will be invested with plenty of power on personnel.

The most hotly pursued candidates can afford to be choosy. The current openings all have some drawbacks and advantages, but the most careful coaches are likely to look at one important factor: which teams have good quarterback situations, an especially important consideration in a year without a strong quarterback class in free agency or the draft. Of the teams that fired coaches or general managers on Monday, only two, the Bears and the Chargers, have quarterbacks who are considered championship-caliber.

Whisenhunt might embody the problem more than most. When he had Kurt Warner, the Cardinals went to the Super Bowl. But after Warner retired, Whisenhunt and Graves were unable to identify and develop the next great Arizona quarterback  they used four starters this season  and they paid for that failure with their jobs.

This may not be the most active market ever for coaches though. There were 10 new coaches going into the 2009 season and several of the coaches fired Monday  especially Reid, who went to the N.F.C. Championship game five times with the Eagles and has indicated that he wants to coach again immediately  are expected to find new jobs quickly.

But once the coaches are in place, time quickly becomes their enemy. With Reids firing, the longest-tenured head coach in the N.F.L. is Bill Belichick, whom New England hired in 2000. His job security is rare, though. It has taken perhaps the best quarterback in history, five Super Bowl appearances and three championships to earn it.