As deadly flames ripped through a three-story Bronx home early Monday morning, the green metal window canopies that provided residents with shade became improvised escape routes.

Several people shimmied and slid to safety down the angled awnings of 735 Beach Avenue in the Soundview neighborhood, falling from the second floor into the arms of neighbors who had huddled to catch them as the fire engulfed the small interior rooms around 5:30 a.m.

Two others were rescued inside as firefighters battled the blaze: a teenage girl and a 73-year-old woman. They were listed in stable condition at Jacobi Medical Center.

But three people never made it out. A man and a woman in their 70s and a 12-year-old boy were found dead at the scene, a Fire Department official said, and two firefighters were injured.

The police identified the boy as Jahvonte Smith, who lived on the third floor. The older man, John Debro, 73, also lived on the third floor, the police said, while Annetta Isaac, 71, lived on the second floor of the building.

It was not immediately clear whether there was any family connection among the three.

The cause of the fire, which burned on the second and third floors for three hours before being declared under control at 8:40 a.m., appeared to be a gas leak, the police said. Witnesses told investigators from the Police and Fire Departments that they had smelled gas before the fire.

Toure Bakary, who lives in a nearly identical building that abuts the burned multifamily home, said he smelled smoke sometime after 5 a.m. As the fire worsened, he fled the building.

That is when his neighbors began climbing out the windows and sliding down the awnings.

Mr. Bakary, a 50-year-old cabdriver, said that he was part of a group of neighbors who helped catch those fleeing the fire. He said he caught three boys and one girl.

Lots of families, he said of the residents, some from French-speaking countries in Africa. Lots of kids.

The police reported one injury among those who jumped to safety  a 48-year-old woman who broke her ankle.

Attention was focused on Ms. Isaac, who could be seen at the window and appeared to have been trapped by the flames, Mr. Bakary said. As the smoke thickened around them, he said, a young woman threw a wet towel to Ms. Isaac, telling her to breathe.

Im on fire, he heard her say.

Heat and black smoke engulfed the area, Mr. Bakary said, forcing those gathered around the building to retreat.

Hours later, after the fire was extinguished and the smoke had cleared, the building appeared charred above the windows. The awnings on the second and third floors were completely torn off. Those on the first floor remained, bent down and burned.