A lot of talent, a dash of luck, some leadership and a comedian  every undefeated, top-ranked, on-top-of-the-world Notre Dame team has required one great clown, Ara Parseghian, the former Fighting Irish coach, said recently.

Then he thought: well, Lou Holtzs 1988 championship team had three.

The Three Amigos they were called: Frank Stams, Wes Pritchett and Mike Stonebreaker. Each was an all-American  Stams at defensive end and the other two at linebacker  and they were self-described knuckleheads.

In that way, they were the anti-Manti Teo, this years star linebacker who leaves the clowning to nose guard Louis Nix III. Teo, though, would have fit in just fine, the Three Amigos say. They would have made room for a Heisman finalist. They explained their roles: Stams was the sack artist, Pritchett was the hulk in the middle, and Stonebreaker just flew to the ball.

And Teo, said Stams, hes all of the Three Amigos combined. Pritchett added a slight caveat, The Three Amigos were a little bit wilder, I think.

During their first encounter, on Stonebreakers recruiting visit, Pritchett found him to be cocky. As Pritchett and Stams escorted him around campus to parties, Stonebreaker would sometimes return a joke on cue, and sometimes not respond at all.

I thought, What the heck is this guys attitude? Either he was arrogant or just ignoring me, Pritchett said in a recent phone interview. Then I found out he was deaf in one ear. I felt bad.

Stonebreaker, the smallest of the three at 6 feet, 230 pounds, thought he had been mistakenly paired with an offensive lineman. Pritchett was 6 feet 2 and weighed about 250 pounds. Stams, at about 6-2 and 240, had been a fullback. But in the spring of 1986 he broke his leg in practice and missed the entire season. It proved serendipitous because after Lou Holtz arrived that year, Stams decided he was not fast enough for Holtzs offense.

At a staff meeting the day after the injury, Holtz offered Stams to any position coach willing to have him. Stams was told that Barry Alvarez, the defensive coordinator and linebackers coach, raised his hand and said, Ill take the rum-dum.

Holtz handled the offense and left the defense to Alvarez, who tutored Stams. By 1988, Roger Valdiserri, the longtime sports information director, was calling Stams, Pritchett and Stonebreaker the Three Amigos, after the movie starring Steve Martin, Chevy Chase and Martin Short.

All three of them were happy-go-lucky kids, Valdiserri said.

Said Pritchett: We were absolutely the most fun guys, yes.

One day at practice in 1988, a play spilled out of bounds near where the news media were standing. Pritchett emerged from the pack and returned to the huddle puffing a cigar, the red glow illuminating his face mask. He had snagged it from a reporter.

Some sort of discretion was necessary, because Holtz was a notorious stickler for discipline, a Brian Kelly type who would yell until he was red in the face. The Three Amigos made it a priority to avoid Holtz at all costs.

We would smell his pipe coming around the corner and we would all get quiet and sit still, Pritchett said. Hey, we were scared of him. He was a 145-pound guy who everybody walked around on eggshells.

Their sanctuary was Alvarezs office, where they hung out and talked about life, where Alvarez would sometimes have a sandwich delivered for lunch only to find that Pritchett or Stams had eaten half of it and left a note. It usually read, Hey, Coach, thanks for the sandwich. They would sign it, Mike Stonebreaker.

Stonebreaker was two years younger, always the straight man of the three, he said. And Alvarez was something of an enabler. Stams called him a real cool cucumber, for the sunglasses he wore at practice.

Stonebreaker said Alvarez was a coach they could joke with, but we respected him; there was a fine line there, you know?

In their estimation, Alvarez let them be. He used a simple defensive scheme, put them in the right spots and let their talent do the rest. Stonebreaker remembers laughing on the field as they pulled each other off blocks and raced to the ball carrier.

In that way, they were like Teo. Pritchett points out that he had more tackles (112) that season than Teo has this year (103), and yet got no Heisman hype. Stams led the team with seven sacks, and Stonebreaker intercepted two passes. Together, the Three Amigos personified a defense that allowed only 12.3 points per game.

They were good, but lucky too. In the season opener, Michigan missed a field-goal attempt that would have won the game as time expired. The closest call came mid-October, when they met No. 1 Miami, which had won 36 consecutive regular-season games. Pritchett arrived to a practice that week wearing a tutu.

At least, that is what Stams and Stonebreaker said. Pritchett vehemently denied it. Notre Dame won, 31-30, after Miami failed on a late 2-point conversion attempt.

Once the Fighting Irish easily handled No. 2 Southern California, earning a spot in the Fiesta Bowl against No. 3 West Virginia, Pritchett realized, If we would focus and concentrate on that game, then we could celebrate for the rest of our lives.

The Three Amigos will again celebrate that Fiesta Bowl win  that 1988 national championship season  on the eve of Mondays championship game in Miami. A party is planned. Alvarez will be there. So will Holtz, and all three Amigos.

Asked what will happen when the Three Amigos hit South Beach, Stams laughed heartily for several seconds.

I dont know, I dont know, he said. I think were going to keep it under control because we all want to watch the game the next day. Dont want to be watching it without our shoestrings, if you know what I mean.