WASHINGTON  It did not seem to dawn on the Nets until late in the fourth quarter that, two days after stunning the N.B.A.s best team, they were trailing the worst.

It was precisely the situation that Coach P. J. Carlesimo had feared, sensing before the game that a letdown might be looming. The Nets, wrapping up a road swing, were following a monumental win in Oklahoma City on Wednesday, and have a home game on Saturday against Sacramento.

But on Friday here at the Verizon Center, the Nets (18-15) needed every second of double overtime to beat the Wizards, 115-113. Joe Johnson hit the go-ahead jumper with 0.7 seconds remaining.

I knew I wasnt going to pass, Johnson said.

Johnsons final basket ended a staggering, back-and-forth affair. The Nets trailed by as many as 14 in the first half and were down by 8 points with 1 minute 27 seconds left in the first overtime.

But they clawed back and even led, 104-101, before the Wizards rookie Bradley Beal hit a 3-pointer at the buzzer to send the game into a second overtime. Carlesimo said he normally would have fouled in that situation, but the team had not practiced it.

I think the worst thing you can do is put them in a situation where you havent worked on something, Carlesimo said.

Exactly one month after the Wizards (4-27) upset the Miami Heat here, the Nets nearly fell victim in the same fashion: flagging intensity, porous defense and an early deficit that nearly proved impossible to overcome.

It was almost as Carlesimo had described in a warning before the game, knowing the dramatic swings his team has taken from game to game this season. The Nets went 11-4 in November and 5-11 in December, and lately it seems their mission is to prove which record better reflects the truth.

They lost by 31 to San Antonio on Monday, in what Carlesimo considered probably their worst game of the year. Then they beat Oklahoma City by 17 on Wednesday, in what might have been their best.

Despite that, Carlesimo did not feel the team overlooked the Wizards, though the Nets trailed, 55-52, at halftime.

I think its a good win to hang in the way we did, Carlesimo said. Yes, we feel we can play better. But thats not fair to these guys. These guys played the hell out of it tonight.

Brooklyns defense on Friday was suspect from the outset. Washington, the worst-scoring team in the league, averaging just 88.7 points on 40.6 percent shooting, scored a season-high 30 points in the first quarter.

We didnt come out with the same effort and intensity that we did at O.K.C., Johnson said. We may have underestimated this team a little bit.

Deron Williams said, Its not how we wanted to come out.

The Nets did not take a lead until 7 minutes 9 seconds remained in the game, and from there the score continued going back and forth. Beal tied it, 86-86, with a thunderous dunk a minute later, and Jordan Crawford gave the Wizards another lead with a 3-pointer.

The Nets had a chance to win it with 18.7 seconds left. After the ball swung around, Williams found Gerald Wallace underneath, but he missed the layup. Lopez flushed the rebound home over Nene, but that lead lasted only 2.4 seconds before Nene came back with a floating hook shot to tie the score with 0.8 seconds left in regulation.

I botched my defensive assignment, what more can I say? Lopez said. I shouldnt have let him go so strong with his right hand.

The Wizards scored the first 8 points in overtime, but the Nets cut their lead to 3 with 57.5 seconds left, and a Williams layup brought the margin down to one. Crawford missed two free throws with 14.1 seconds remaining, and Nene fouled Lopez on the rebound.

Lopez hit both free throws to give Brooklyn a 102-101 lead. Crawford then missed a fall-away jumper from the top of the arc with 5.9 seconds remaining. But, ahead by 104-101, the Nets opted not to foul Beal, who got an open shot at the wing after a superb screen from Emeka Okafor.

Beal drilled the 3-point jumper to send the crowd into a frenzy. In the second overtime, the Wizards hit just 3 of 8 shots, but they still managed to tie the score with 9.1 seconds left on free throws by Beal.

But they could not win it. Johnson got the ball and made the most of his chance with it.

Kris Humphries was held out of Fridays game after spraining his left ankle in Wednesdays game. Guard C. J. Watson also missed his second consecutive game with a bruised right knee.