FLORHAM PARK, N.J.  A distinct pattern has emerged for the Jets these last two years: the day after their final game is as bizarre and disorienting a spectacle as their season itself. It is a tradition like no other.

This is what was supposed to happen Monday, a full two weeks after the Jets, hurtling toward 6-10, were eliminated from the playoff chase: they would dismiss General Manager Mike Tannenbaum and their offensive coordinator, Tony Sparano, with a strong voice  Coach Rex Ryan or, better yet, the owner Woody Johnson  discussing the moves later in the day.

This is what did happen Monday: the Jets fired Tannenbaum, whose 15-year tenure with the Jets ended because of a failure to restock its talent base, while Sparano dangled, Ryan hunkered down, and Johnson avoided the public eye, his five-paragraph statement regarding Tannenbaum notwithstanding.

There was no explanation why Ryans scheduled news conference was canceled other than an opaque response from a team spokesman: an organizational decision. That decision left DBrickashaw Ferguson, Joe McKnight and Chaz Schilens, among others, to speak on behalf of the team on a day when the Jets made their most important move since hiring Ryan almost four years ago.

All around the league Monday, from Philadelphia to Cleveland to Arizona, coaches were canned and executives sacked. Yet on a mournful day, accountability still reigned. Team owners, or high-ranking officials, answered questions and explained those organizations thought processes. Even Norv Turner, fired as San Diegos coach, had a farewell news conference.

The Jets are often criticized for being tone-deaf and for making the wrong move  or the right one, just far too late. On Monday, it seemed altogether fitting that they made what was widely viewed as the proper decision for their future but still managed to bungle it.

Johnsons absence from Sundays 28-9 loss at Buffalo was conspicuous and, indeed, foreboding. Rather than watch another aimless defeat with the man he would soon fire, Johnson stayed back, planning for the future.

The Jets have already hired Jed Hughes of the recruiting firm Korn/Ferry to lead the search for Tannenbaums replacement. Potential candidates include the Miami Dolphins assistant general manager, Brian Gaine, a Rockland County native and a disciple of Bill Parcellss; Tom Gamble, the San Francisco 49ers director of player personnel; and Marc Ross, the Giants director of college scouting.

Like all Jets fans, I am disappointed with this years results, Johnson said in his statement. However, I am confident that this change will best position our team for greater success going forward.

No doubt the Jets position is appealing; only 32 of these jobs exist, after all. But whoever takes over for Tannenbaum will inherit a mess at quarterback, several bloated contracts and a roster in dire need of an overhaul, not to mention a coach he did not choose in Ryan, whose return in 2013 Johnson guaranteed.

This season was doomed by a pair of decisions made in a two-week stretch in March  extending quarterback Mark Sanchezs contract and acquiring Tim Tebow.

Guaranteeing Sanchez $20.5 million seemed to lack foresight as well as financial restraint. Sanchez regressed, losing his starting job  not to mention the confidence of some teammates  and committing 26 turnovers.

The Jets then surrendered two draft picks and $2.53 million to Denver over three years for Tebow, who proved nothing more than a distraction and a decoy, frustrated with the Jets inability to integrate him into their offense.

Tebow amounted to the teams lone significant addition on offense, raising a concern over the summer that has since been validated: that Tannenbaum failed to surround Sanchez with enough talent. Even before injuries to Santonio Holmes, Dustin Keller and Stephen Hill, the Jets lacked playmakers.

Tannenbaum also backed the hiring of Sparano, who presided over the 30th-ranked offense in the N.F.L. The unit scored 10 or fewer points in seven games, and its inexperience in quarterback development and play-calling produced an offense that lacked creativity, ambition and direction.

Tannenbaum, 43, leaves a complex legacy with the Jets, who hired him in February 1997 as a salary-cap expert and elevated him to general manager nine years later to replace Terry Bradway. Under Tannenbaum, the Jets were 57-55 in seven seasons, reaching the playoffs three times  but they last qualified in 2010, when they advanced to their second consecutive A.F.C. Championship game.

History will remember Tannenbaum for selecting cornerstones like Ferguson, Nick Mangold and Darrelle Revis and for his aggressive moves in free agency and the trade market that repositioned the Jets as contenders.

But he was also guilty of overvaluing and misjudging players, failing to fill the roster with adequate depth and, particularly in the past few years, overseeing a draft haul meager in quality and quantity. Tannenbaums riskiest move  trading up to select Sanchez fifth over all in 2009  yielded immediate gratification but fleeting success.

After being dismissed Monday morning, Tannenbaum spoke to the team he assembled. He told the players that he believed in them and that there are champions on this team that havent been crowned yet, a sentiment he later expressed in a statement issued by the team.

Tight end Jeff Cumberland called Tannenbaums speech real emotional. Sanchez said it was heartfelt. The players, Revis said, felt sorry for him.

At the end, everyone clapped. For a team embarrassed by Bart Scotts obscene gesture to a photographer during the 2011 post-mortem, consider the reaction, unlike aspects of the day, progress.