It was a restaurant where F. Scott Fitzgerald had a tryst with a woman in a booth  supposedly. It was a bar with front steps that were built expressly to trip up Prohibition-era policemen who would periodically rush in to spoil the party  maybe. And it had bootlegging tunnels that led from inside the bar far out into the street  probably not.

This particular Greenwich Village haunt is clad in decades of lore, and it can sometimes be difficult to paw through the embellishment or outright fiction. But some things are known for certain: it was a beloved literary hangout and a storied old place called Chumleys, which opened as a speakeasy in the 1920s and was forced to close its doors in 2007 when the facade of its building tumbled in the street along with pieces of an adjoining building.

After more than five years, the Department of Buildings has declared that the building, 86 Bedford Street  the last of five structures involved in the collapse to be rebuilt  is structurally sound, and the department has passed responsibility for the parcel from its forensic engineering unit, which oversees the most dangerous and difficult projects, to the divisions that oversee standard construction sites as the owner finishes the inside.

This was one of the most difficult jobs Ive done, and I do this all the time, said Timothy Lynch, the executive director of the forensic unit.

For everybody involved, it has been a long, long road. (Two of my three kids werent even born when this place collapsed, said Jim Miller, managing partner of Chumleys, who pays a few thousand dollars every year to keep the bars furniture and mementos in storage.) But on the upside, Chumleys still has about 75 years left on its 99-year lease.

When the reconstruction process began, these five buildings at the corner of Bedford and Barrow Streets were so interconnected and so decrepit that putting them back together was far more complicated than starting from scratch, Mr. Lynch explained. There was no stable structure to which a weakened wall might be secured. The footprint of the buildings was so small that there was nowhere to put a big staging area, or even many construction workers. And the number of agencies involved  the Landmarks Preservation Commission, tenants rights groups, even the parks department when a nearby tree was threatened  made the bureaucracy a behemoth.

I dont know that theres a single agency in the city, but for maybe Homeless Services, that hasnt gotten involved, said Margaret Streicker Porres, president of Newcastle Realty Services, who owned the five buildings when they collapsed, and still owns 86 Bedford today. Actually, I take that back, she said of the Department of Homeless Services, which stepped in to monitor tenant issues, because they did, too.

Ms. Streicker Porres bought the five low-slung buildings in 2005 for $6.9 million, when they were all on a single city parcel and filled with a hodgepodge of tiny rental apartments. The buildings had had almost no maintenance in years, according to the Buildings Department, and by the end of 2005, the facade of Chumleys home, 86 Bedford Street, was wrapped in steel cables to try to keep it secure. The next year, Ms. Streicker Porres said, the chimney of 84 Bedford began to collapse. Then in April 2007, the big one came.

Three city blocks were shut down, Ms. Streicker Porres said. The facade sheared off 84, and four stories of the building were in the front room. And this facade, she continued, pointing to Chumleys building, was lying in the street.

No one was hurt, but the stress forced Ms. Streicker Porres, who was pregnant with her daughter, into labor.

I had to walk over to Hudson and hail a cab, she said.

After the collapse, two of the buildings, including the one housing Chumleys, had to be rebuilt from the ground up. And while portions of the exteriors could be saved on the other three buildings (two of which have since been combined), almost everything else had to be reconstructed. All of this was done to specifications laid out by the landmarks commission.