Glint-eyed and with a practiced amiability, the House Appropriations Committee chairman, Harold Rogers , would have us know that his heart is heavy at our suffering, even as he applies a little Kentucky common sense to New York and New Jersey.

Just because the United States Senate approved a $60.4 billion package for the hurricane-ravaged lands of New York and New Jersey last week, dont expect the Kentucky congressman to move so fast.

Thats the Senate; they do their thing, Mr. Rogers, a Republican, told reporters recently. We are scrubbing the numbers, looking at the justifications, being sure we are dealing with the results of the hurricane and not other causes.

I set out in search of other causes on Monday, driving down Father Capodanno Boulevard on Staten Island. I saw houses spun like tops off foundations and strips of siding ripped off once-handsome homes. I saw ruined Barbie dolls and Legos swept in eddies, mountains of debris and the broken skeleton of the vintage 1940s Victory Diner.

I knocked at the door of Santo Lisas home, which faces the white-flecked Atlantic Ocean. A retired firefighter with the loose-limbed walk of a man accustomed to running toward danger, Mr. Lisa is the sort whom politicians love to pose with after disasters. The same is true of his next-door neighbor, a young firefighter, except that hes not there now. His home, smashed and leaning sideways, has an Unsafe  Do Not Enter or Occupy notice taped to its front door.

When Hurricane Sandy howled, Mr. Lisa heard an old woman screaming for help. He ran downstairs to get a thick rope; he planned to wade into ocean waters and run fast as rapids to rescue her. His basement already bubbled with water. He listened until her screams stopped. They found her body later in the marsh behind her home.

New York is getting $60 billion? When? Where? Mr. Lisa said. Show it to me. Well be O.K., but this was a great neighborhood of cops, firemen and sanitation men. A lot of us are hurting here.

There are few sights less edifying than self-satisfied men giving themselves a fiscal conservative rubdown as a stretch of America lies ruined. United States Senator Dan Coats of Indiana assured the Northeast last week that he cared deeply, even as he tried to surgically remove more than half the hurricane relief package.

An emergency funding bill should focus on the emergency needs of the victims, not the needs of politicians, he noted primly, adding that loading up an expensive package with unrelated projects and earmarks for other states is not the way we should use taxpayer dollars.

No doubt the keen-eyed could discover lard in the rescue package. Our politicians are as expert as those of Indiana, South Carolina and Mississippi in mining a budget for riches.

The cost of disaster aid has crept up, fueled by the terror attacks of Sept. 11 and Hurricane Katrina, to the point that the Federal Reserve recently found that most cities, whatever their bitter losses, no longer suffer any long-term economic declines from natural disasters.

That might be seen as cause for celebration. Or not. Senator Coats has many complaints. Only $9 billion of the Senate rescue package, he says, would be spent in the next nine months. And it should not include money for the Legal Services Corporation.

THIS last is a tip-off as to the game afoot, as the Legal Services Corporation long ago achieved Hezbollah status in the Republican cosmology. I nosed around and found that after tornadoes and all manner of disasters in Missouri, Tennessee, Mississippi and Kentucky, Legal Services lawyers helped broken families and businesses file insurance, FEMA and unemployment claims.

Tug still harder on the yarn ball of these arguments and the filaments come apart. Some money will not be spent quickly? Guilty as charged: It takes many months to fortify boilers and elevators in public housing, to replace subway electrical systems and rebuild nursing homes and beaches.

House and Senate Republican leaders seem particularly distressed when our politicians talk of safeguarding our region against the next globally warmed torrent of ocean water. This carries the unwelcome scent of free spending.

Representative Rogers is a more practical man when playing locally. After floodwaters ripped through Kentucky in 2010, he announced that he had snared $2 million in federal dollars so various rural hamlets could put up flood walls and diversionary canals.

Years ago, as a reporter, I sat in post-Katrina Gulfport, Miss., and listened as Gov. Haley Barbour, a Republican, crowed of raking in federal aid. I might have felt more enthusiastic had I not just heard his people boast that federal cash would change the Redneck Riviera into a more upscale locale.

Whatever. In my city, in my region, the musty whiff of disaster hangs heavy, and our politicians talk of keeping neighborhoods whole. That commitment, to quickly rebuilding neighborhoods within reason, offers a good definition of the commonweal.