CAVE CREEK, Ariz.  From an improvised pulpit nestled on a slice of desert sand between a bull-riding ring and a bar serving biscuits and $3 beers, the preacher opened his last sermon of the year with a question and a revelation.

How many of you have ever been a suspect in a murder case? he asked, his blue eyes scanning a small flock of congregants huddled around a pile of burning logs. I have.

Steve Gilbertson, 52, has been a preacher for about 30 years. Four months ago, he started a church of his own. At his last job, he had led an informal Sunday morning service over coffee and doughnuts at a local megachurch. Now he preaches under a mesquite tree, in the shadow of a saloon best known for the quality of its country-western bands and the fervor of its regulars allegiance to the Green Bay Packers.

The saloon is called the Buffalo Chip, and the church it houses, officially named Ecclesia, is informally known as Church at the Chip, or cowboy church. Mr. Gilbertson and the saloons owner, Larry Wendt, met several years ago at the church where Mr. Gilbertson worked and that Mr. Wendt sometimes attended. Mr. Wendt remembered asking him to come by on Fridays to say a prayer before bulls and riders took to the ring, on the edge of a knoll punctuated by saguaro cactus. When he heard Mr. Gilbertson needed a place for his church, he offered him space at the saloon.

I spend all week making sinners out of our good cowboys and cowgirls, selling them drinks and a lot of food, Mr. Wendt said. The least I can do is try to straighten them out a little on Sundays.

Alcohol and religion might seem incongruous, but the combination is not new. Thirty years ago, the Archdiocese of Chicago started a series of lectures for young adults called Theology on Tap, which have since been given in bars and restaurants in many American cities, as well as overseas.

In Pensacola, Fla., the Perdido Bay United Methodist Church has been holding weekly services at the Flora-Bama Lounge, Package and Oyster Bar since July 2011, including baptisms right in the Gulf of Mexico. Uncle Charlies Tavern in Cheyenne, Wyo., began holding an informal study group about a year ago called Bibles and Beer.

Mr. Gilbertsons Sunday services end just as the saloon opens at 10 a.m. He said he does not judge or mind if his congregants stick around for a drink, as some of them might do.

Christine Robins, who moved to neighboring Scottsdale from Virginia in October, heard about the church while two-stepping at the Buffalo Chip, and came to like it because its not pretentious, its not a big production, but they love the Lord just the same, which is the most important thing.

Kathleen and Abraham Abaie, who live in Cave Creek, heard about the church from a sign in the saloons parking lot. Cali Broermann was once in a Bible study group led by Mr. Gilbertson, and, on Sunday, while visiting from Michigan, she accompanied her parents and brother to the service.

Its kind of cool to have it in a different setting, outside a regular church building, Ms. Broermann said.

From the start, Mr. Gilbertson said, he envisioned his venture as an opportunity to take the church to the people.

Close to 150 people attended a Christmas Eve service, he said. On Sunday, when it was barely 50 degrees, 20 people showed up. He said he had thought about moving the service inside, as he had done in the past, arranging the chairs on the dance floor under the dim light of a neon Coors sign. But Mr. Wendts workers were busy setting up for a Packers game, which often brings 500 people to the saloon. (The Buffalo Chip used to be owned by Max McGee, who helped the Packers to six championship game appearances and scored the first touchdown in Super Bowl history, in 1967.)

One way to keep warm is to sing good and loud, Mr. Gilbertson told the congregants, then strummed his guitar and began singing the first of the days hymns.

The Abaies wore wool gloves. Ms. Broermann leaned toward the fire. Some wrapped themselves in blankets Mr. Gilbertsons wife, Donna, had handed out.

In his sermon, Mr. Gilbertson told about the killing of a member of a church where he had worked before moving to Arizona, and how detectives, looking to eliminate potential suspects, got him to take a lie-detector test. He recalled that he had begun to feel uneasy partway through it  not guilty, yet wondering if it looked as if he had done something wrong. His name was cleared. From there, he moved on to a story of guilt and persecution from the Gospel of John, about a woman accused of adultery and sentenced to be stoned to death.

If were very honest, we all stand condemned by our own ideals  the loving becomes hateful, the generous becomes greedy, Mr. Gilbertson said.

Like the adulterous woman whose life Jesus saved, he went on, we are all guilty, but we are not condemned.

Mr. Gilbertson sang one more hymn and bid goodbye to his congregants, wishing them a happy New Year. As they walked away, music began to play inside the saloon, telling mamas not to let their babies grow up to be cowboys.