Morgan Gliedman, 27, the daughter of a prominent New York City oncologist, was nine months pregnant, and her boyfriend, Aaron Greene, 31, son of the president of an acclaimed artwork-restoration business, was excited about the birth of his first child, a relative said.

But on Saturday, police investigators searched the couples apartment on West Ninth Street and found what appeared to be ingredients for a bomb, as well as weapon-making guides, the authorities said.

They confiscated seven grams of a chemical called hexamethylene triperoxide diamine, or HMTD, an explosive. The discovery prompted the police to evacuate the building as a precaution.

This is a serious explosive used in terrorists attacks previously, Paul J. Browne, the Police Departments chief spokesman, said on Monday. We have not yet determined why Greene had them in his possession.

Mr. Browne stressed that investigators had not found evidence of a planned terrorist attack.

Mr. Greene and Ms. Gliedman were charged with criminal possession of a loaded firearm and criminal possession of an explosive substance.

The location of the apartment in Greenwich Village recalled the 1970 explosion in a nearby town house caused by a bomb being assembled by the Weather Underground movement.

But the police said they did not believe that Mr. Greene was active in any political movements.

Investigators found the explosive powder in a plastic container. In a bedroom, they discovered a sawed-off, 12-gauge Mossberg 500 shotgun, a 12-gauge Ruger over-under shotgun and 60 shotgun shells. Investigators also found a flare launcher, described by the police as a commercially available replica of a M203 grenade launcher, four flares and nine high-capacity rifle magazines, according to Mr. Browne and a criminal complaint filed by the Manhattan district attorney.

Then there were stacks of literature: several United States Army field manuals and do-it-yourself instructions for making bombs, booby traps and deadly homemade weapons.

Its an ongoing investigation that aroused our concerns, obviously, because of the weapons, including the explosives, and the material found in the apartment, including these handbooks involving weapons of mass killing, Mr. Browne said. What it means is still unknown.

We havent made a connection to any known plot or any connection to any known terrorists, Mr. Browne said.

Mr. Browne described Mr. Greene and Ms. Gliedman as admitted heroin addicts.

He said investigators searched the apartment after a tip from someone who had been inside.

Ms. Gliedman was at a hospital Monday after giving birth, the police said.

Ms. Gliedmans father, Paul Gliedman, is director of radiation oncology at Beth Israel Hospital Medical Center in Brooklyn. Her mother, Susyn Schops Gliedman, is a real estate agent.

Reached by phone, Ms. Schops Gliedman said her daughter was being unfairly blamed.

Hes trying to pin it all on her, she said, referring to Mr. Greene.