To avoid the sight of unpaid bills and to simply steer clear of a home that reminded her too much of recently deceased family members, Maria Caceres began to spend some nights at a friends place.

She was not shirking responsibility. As a mother of two sons, Emmanuel Caceres, 31, and Lorenzo Arzola, 16, she understands the necessity of fulfilling obligations. Ms. Caceres was merely seeking whatever temporary solace she could find from the threats facing her Bronx apartment, and from the painful reminders of lost loved ones.

Last year, she was rocked by two devastating losses: the death of her brother in January and the death of her mother in April. Both lived in her native Dominican Republic.

Everyone in my family says I was the sweetest, happiest person. said Ms. Caceres, 49. But not anymore.

Grief has become a mainstay of her life since 2005, when her ex-husband, also Emmanuels father, died. She has experienced the deaths of several more close relatives since, including a beloved sister-in-law and her own father, who was killed in 2010 in a hit-and-run accident.

Last January, Ms. Caceress brother died from a heart attack, and she traveled to the Dominican Republic to lay him to rest, missing several days of work at her job as a maintenance worker for the New York City medical examiners office.

At the time, the family found out that Ms. Caceress mother, who lived in the Dominican Republic, had liver cancer. Ms. Caceres said her family, not wanting to add to her mothers burden, decided not to tell her about the diagnosis.

We knew if she found out, shed fall apart, Ms. Caceres said. She explained that the cancer prognosis was bleak and that her mother had been making regular hospital visits to treat her worsening hepatitis B, which she had contracted 30 years earlier from a blood transfusion.

When Ms. Caceres returned to the United States, she saved $700 to send her mother for care. She had sent money to help with hospital expenses on previous occasions. Sadly, when her mother died in April, Ms. Caceres could not afford to attend the funeral.

I went to say goodbye to my brother, but not my mother, she said before breaking down in tears.

Ms. Caceres took a monthlong, unpaid bereavement period from her job. That lack of income, in addition to her sending money to her mother, resulted in her falling behind on rent by $1,693. She shares the $750-a-month apartment with her sons.

Each month, Ms. Caceres earns $1,760. She is ineligible for public assistance and does not receive financial support from Lorenzos father. Emmanuel Caceres works at a messenger center in Manhattan and also contributes to the household, but the family could not raise enough money to cover the back rent.

For help, Ms. Caceres turned to the Childrens Aid Society, one of the agencies supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund. The agency drew $943 from the fund to cover part of her arrears and pay her June rent. Ms. Caceres also received help from colleagues and borrowed from friends and family to pay the rest, pulling together $1,500.

Childrens Aid had been working with Ms. Caceres and her sons since 2011 through its Functional Family Therapy program, which provides families with counseling for trauma.

The agency was first referred to the family because of Lorenzos excessive absences from school. The timing of his first streak of missed days coincided roughly with the death of his paternal grandmother in 2008. Ms. Caceres has since tried to get him mental health services through Visiting Nurse Service of New York, but he does not qualify. She says she hopes to find him low-cost counseling soon. Because Lorenzo has not been able to return to the classroom, the Education Department recently arranged for him to begin online schooling from home.

Ms. Caceres has also tried to locate a bereavement support group within walking distance of her apartment in order to better deal with her sadness. As she heads into a future of financial unknowns and absent loved ones, she said, her sons give her hope and strength.

They are the only support that I have, she said. They say things are going to be better. Thats what I have.