RISHON LEZION, Israel  For the seven years she has been selling real estate here in Israels fourth-largest city, Ahuva Madmoni has had clients with the usual range of priorities: view, high floor, square footage, proximity to good schools. Today, Ms. Madmoni said, the first question of the couples is, Does the apartment have a safe room?

Such a demand was hardly imaginable here before a rocket struck a building in the western part of town on Nov. 20  the first fired from the Gaza Strip to ever directly hit a residential area in the populated center of Israel. It may be the most discernible effect of the volatility of the last two months.

In that time, Israelis were confronted with an eight-day conflict with Gaza; the Palestinians status upgrade at the United Nations; international condemnation of Israels settlement push in East Jerusalem; and an election campaign in which candidates seem to be trying to out-conservative one another.

All of the political activity has certainly increased conversation about the situation, local shorthand for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. But if the intense fighting with Gaza heightened concerns about safety, its aftermath seems only to have renewed many residents resignation to what they see as the unlikeliness of a long-term solution in their lifetimes.

In conversations with 30 people  most around a downtown park or inside the popular Ikea cafe  many said their focus had quickly returned to more mundane concerns about jobs, children and apartment rents. Some talked of leaving the troubled country or worried that their children might  in line with a recent poll for the newspaper Haaretz indicating that 37 percent of Israelis were considering doing so. And in the interviews here, at least half said they did not see anyone worth voting for on Jan. 22.

People are looking after their personal factors  theyre so skeptical about the global changing, they say Oh, Ill worry about my survival, explained Ayal Sheffer, 43, a publishing executive with three young daughters who was having lunch at Ikea after shopping for a bed.

I just want quiet for my children and my country, he said. But as for the Palestinians, he added, I dont think any contract wed do with them would give us quiet.

We want to pay the price, but we dont believe in the other side, Mr. Sheffer said.

Rishon LeZion, about seven miles south of Tel Aviv, was founded in 1882 by European Jews. Its middle-class population has doubled over the past two decades, including a large community of Ethiopians and an even larger contingent of immigrants from the former Soviet Union. There is a wide beachfront path filled with walkers and joggers at sunrise, a skyline of tall apartment blocks and cranes building new ones.

The first blue-and-white flag with a Star of David was raised here in 1885, according to city officials, and in 1887 a local resident, Shmuel Cohen, combined the poem Hatikvah with a European melody  which later became Israels national anthem. In the last national elections, in 2009, Rishon voted in slightly higher numbers than Israel as a whole for the two leading parties, Likud and Kadima, as well as for the Russian-dominated Yisrael Beiteinu, but gave less support to the ultra-Orthodox Shas and far-left Meretz parties.

Mayor Dov Zur, 57, said that as a child growing up here, he was quite a believer in the peace process, but then, like most Israelis, I abandoned this belief. His former confidence returned after meetings between Israeli mayors and their Palestinian counterparts in the West Bank.

People are living on both sides of the border, they want good life on both sides, he said. The position of mayor, never mind if its in Israel or Palestine, its a make-decision work. What we find in this discussion is to be practical about the solution to our problem.

In many ways, the interviews here reflect several recent statewide surveys. A December poll by Daat showed that 12 percent to 14 percent named peace as their highest priority, a drop from 17 percent in January 2012, 19 percent in 2008 and in 1998, and 24 percent in 1992. A separate poll on behalf of the Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs found that 83 percent of Israeli Jews do not believe that a withdrawal to the 1967 borders and a division of Jerusalem would bring an end to the conflict. And a poll for the pro-peace group Blue-White Future, a group that supports Israels taking unilateral steps to force a two-state solution, found that support for a two-state solution was higher among older respondents.

Its sometimes worse, sometimes better, Sofia Turgelan, 34, said of the conflict she has known all her life. Now its quiet, but maybe in six months or one year, it all comes out again.