Manchester United maintained its seven-point lead in the English Premier League with a 4-0 victory over Wigan at the DW Stadium on Tuesday.

Javier Hernndez opened the scoring for the visitors in the 35th minute with a strike from close range before Robin van Persie doubled the advantage eight minutes later. Hernndez added his second in the 63rd minute and Van Persie matched the Mexico international in the 88th minute when he closed out the scoring. Van Persies brace moves him to 64 goals in 76 league games since January 2011.

Manchester City 3, Stoke City 0 Sergio Agero endured a bittersweet first match of 2013 for Manchester City, rounding off the scoring in a victory over Stoke before going off injured.

Agero converted a 74th-minute penalty, adding to goals by Pablo Zabaleta and Edin Dzeko, to ensure Stokes 10-match unbeaten run in the league came to a crushing end at the Etihad Stadium. However, Agero was forced off three minutes later, clutching his right hamstring, after pulling up sharply as he ran.

City remained seven points behind United in the title race.

Tottenham 3, Reading 1 Tottenham conceded a quick goal to Reading, but still won easily.

Pavel Pogrebnyak scored in the fourth minute for the visiting side, boosting Readings hope of a first away win of the season.But Michael Dawson leveled five minutes later. Emmanuel Adebayor scored the winner in the 51st minute, and Clint Dempsey finished it with about 10 minutes to go.

West Ham 2, Norwich 1 West Ham beat Norwich at Upton Park, handing the Canaries their fourth consecutive league defeat.

The home side relied on first-half goals from Mark Noble and Joey OBrien to secure the victory. Russell Martin scored a late consolation for Norwich.

Noble opened the scoring from the penalty spot in the third minute after the referee, Mark Clattenburg, awarded West Ham a soft penalty when Ryan Bennett held on to Winston Reid.

In the 26th minute, Noble became the architect, wriggling his way into the Norwich box. His cross was cleared, but fell to OBrien who smashed the ball into the net. Martin scored on a volley in the 90th minute but West Ham held on.

West Bromwich Albion 1, Fulham 2 Dimitar Berbatov inspired Fulham to a surprise victory at West Bromwich Albion, helping the Londoners end a four-match winless run that had dropped them close to relegation.

Alex Kacaniklic grabbed Fulhams 58th-minute winner but it was Berbatov who impressed most. The former Manchester United striker opened the scoring in the 40th minute for the leagues first goal of 2013 and impressing throughout with his vision and skill.

Romelu Lukaku, on loan from Chelsea, equalized for West Brom from close range four minutes after the break.

It was Fulhams second away victory of the season.

Villa looked on course to secure a victory when Christian Benteke converted an 84th-minute penalty at the Liberty Stadium. However, Graham provided the last touch in a goalmouth scramble four minutes into injury time.