Their vision called for an edgy, urban design that would stand apart from the clamshell look of arenas elsewhere.

The weathered steel panels and swooping canopy of the Barclays Center, the new home for the Brooklyn Nets, have served notice that brawny, once-industrial Brooklyn is back in the big leagues.

But with innovation has also come headaches.

The fabricator for the 12,000 steel panels  no two alike  abruptly shut down midway through the job.

The panels have occasionally dripped rusty orange blossoms onto the sidewalk.

And lately, iron workers have replaced hundreds of bolts that anchor the panels to the buildings structure. Engineers determined that weaker ones were originally installed, raising concerns about the structures integrity.

The incorrect bolts were discovered only a month before the Barclays Center was scheduled to open on Sept. 28. The arena ultimately opened on time and it survived Hurricane Sandys winds a month later.

After examining every joint, engineers determined that only 8 percent of the 23,351 weaker bolts needed to be replaced.

But the issue has led to questions about communications between regulators and the arenas developer, Forest City Ratner.

The New York City Buildings Department said its inspectors had not been told about the problem with the bolts.

The department was not made aware of this issue, said Anthony Sclafani, a Buildings Department spokesman. We would expect to be notified in a case like this.

But Forest City provided a copy of a nine-page letter concerning the bolts that it said had been filed with the Buildings Department on Sept. 14. That was the day the agency issued a temporary certificate of occupancy that allowed the arena to open as scheduled.

The letter, from an engineering company, outlined a plan to address the recent discovery that incorrect bolts had been used. It did not indicate how many bolts would be replaced, only that a change out had begun.

Robert Sana, executive vice president for construction at Forest City Ratner, played down the problem. He said such issues were not unusual during a major construction project, particularly one with highly customized architecture. But the result was worth it, he said.

Our building is successful because it creates a proper front door for the project and a dramatic entrance that arenas generally dont have, sitting in the middle of a suburban parking lot, Mr. Sana said.

Bruce C. Ratner, chief executive of Forest City Ratner, had offered something for everyone when in 2003 he unveiled plans for the $4.9 billion Atlantic Yards development, which includes the arena.

There would be a professional basketball team to salve the wound left by the departure, many decades before, of the Brooklyn Dodgers baseball team. The project would have lots of affordable housing, and a striking design by the architect Frank Gehry.

But the recession and opposition from community groups stalled the project. In 2009, Mr. Ratner jettisoned the Gehry design, which called for a $1 billion arena, because it was too expensive.

He asked a more conventional arena architect, Ellerbe Becket Architects and Engineers, to come up with an alternative. Later, he brought in SHoP Architects to give the building a striking facade that Mr. Ratner hoped would fulfill his original promise.

It was clear to us, coming off a Gehry design, that we couldnt do just anything, Mr. Sana said.

SHoP wrapped the arena in three bands of pre-weathered steel to give a gritty, muscular cast, hinting at an industrial past. A swooping canopy with an oculus, or circular window, extended 80 feet from the front doors toward a new subway entrance.

This had to be a civic gesture, with the canopy and the oculus creating a public area where people would want to gather, at the mouth of mass transit, said Christopher Sharples of SHoP. Its a legacy project. Its not just about sports.

In February 2010, Hunt Construction, Forest Citys manager for the project, awarded a $32.4 million contract to ASI Limited, a steel fabricator outside Indianapolis, to produce the 12,000 panels that cover 85 percent of the facade.

ASI was to put the panels through a series of wet and dry cycles over four months to create the protective rusty patina.

But right before Christmas 2011, ASI defaulted on a bank loan and shut its doors.

Hunt Construction was eventually able to have the fabrication plant reopened. Most of the original workers were hired to fill two 12-hour shifts a day in a race to make up for lost time.

But in August, an engineering firm discovered the problem with the bolts that fastened the steel plates to the structure. The fabricator had sent five-eighths-of-an-inch bolts that were half as strong as those of that size that had been ordered.

In the end, engineers determined that only 1,768 of the 23,351 bolts  about 8 percent  would need to be cut out and replaced. Workers in December were replacing the final batch, all in the canopy that extends over the entryway.

As for the blossoms of metal staining the sidewalks surrounding the arena? Eventually the panels will stop rusting and workers will use power washers to remove all traces of metal from the sidewalks.