Throughout the Knicks  surprising start this season, there remained a large and familiar puzzle piece still anchored to the bench, along with his $99.7 million contract and All-Star rsum.

But the return of that piece, Amare Stoudemire, on Tuesday at Madison Square Garden  his first action since knee surgery in October  was greeted with a cautious optimism. The Knicks, after all, were 21-9 without him, coexisting with a delicate balance of veteran leadership, tough defense and Carmelo Anthonys lead role.

Now, starting a new year, it seems the Knicks are also beginning a new season. With the Stoudemire experiment under way, the Knicks lost to the Portland Trail Blazers, 105-100, their third defeat in four games.

Anthony, who missed the previous two games with a hyperextended left knee, returned to the lineup and tied a season high with 45 points. But the Knicks frontcourt struggled against the energetic and springy Trail Blazers, who led by as many as 19 points by expertly running pick-and-roll after pick-and-roll, with the Knicks defense always seemingly one step behind.

Defensively were just not where we were at the beginning of the year, Coach Mike Woodson said. Its too much of an uphill climb.

Stoudemire played only 16 minutes off the bench, scoring 6 points and shooting 3 of 8. Woodson said he would need to ease him back into shape, knowing Stoudemire began practicing with the team only on Sunday.

The fans cheered as he rose to enter the game for the first time, with 3 minutes 31 seconds left in the first quarter, and he brought the crowd to its feet with a rousing dunk late in the third.

But otherwise, Stoudemire appeared unsure of himself. He committed a turnover on his first possession, stepping out of bounds underneath the basket, and missed his first five shots.

The game felt like it was going 100 miles an hour, Stoudemire said, adding: But the second half was better than my first. Im hoping my second game will be better than my first.

At one point, after several missed assignments defending Portlands pick-and-roll, Woodson sat down Stoudemire and appeared to coach him on the run. Stoudemire said Woodson was telling him to be more patient.

I expected that was going to happen, Woodson said. Well show him on film tomorrow and hopefully hell learn from it and well build on it.

Almost certainly there will be better, more typical Stoudemire performances to come, but his role with these new-look Knicks remains a topic of debate. On the surface, the return of Stoudemire, a six-time All-Star who averaged 17.5 points and 7.8 rebounds in 47 games last season, represents a significant improvement of the roster, particularly the bench.

There are concerns, however, chiefly about whether Stoudemire might disrupt the teams harmony and flow, and about how he will interact with Anthony, who is off to a start worthy of most valuable player consideration. Would Stoudemire be better coming off the bench? Will he accept a reduced role?

Those guys have been playing phenomenal all season long, Stoudemire said. I just want to get out there and help them as much as I can, any way I can.

Woodson would not speculate on lineups, saying only that he hoped Stoudemire made it through Tuesdays game healthy enough to practice Wednesday. Stoudemire was originally planning on a Christmas Day return against the Lakers in Los Angeles, but the timetable was pushed back. He said before Tuesdays game that he was still not feeling 100 percent, but after the game he said his legs felt fine. I felt very explosive, he said. I had no hesitation at all. Its a great sign.

The Trail Blazers were energetic underneath  they scored 32 points in the paint, with 16 coming on second chances  and assisted on 15 of their first 25 field goals.

Only Anthony kept the Knicks afloat, hitting 8 of 11 shots in the first half. Anthony scored 13 of the teams first 16 points and also banked in a desperation 3-pointer as the buzzer sounded to send the Knicks into halftime down by 58-47.

They came out of the intermission with more energy and quickly trimmed Portlands lead to 3. J. R. Smith scored 8 points in the third quarter, and the defense did a better job clamping down on J. J. Hickson, who scored all 18 of his points in the first half.

The Trail Blazers held a 12-point lead with four minutes remaining, but the Knicks cut the advantage to 100-97 on a 3-pointer by Anthony with 55 seconds left. But Anthony missed a game-tying 3 with 15.9 seconds left, and the Blazers grabbed the rebound.

I will take that shot anytime, Anthony said.

J.R. Smith scored 28 points, becoming the first Knick to score 25 or more points in four straight games while coming off the bench.