SAN ANTONIO  On the first play of the second half of the Spurs  blowout victory over the Nets on Monday night, Coach Gregg Popovich ran a play that had Deron Williams chasing Tony Parker around a Tim Duncan screen, only for Parker to turn and reroute Williams around Duncan again. Duncan scored on a short bank shot off a feed from Parker, who had exploited the Nets defense throughout the first half.

The Spurs took off from there, extending their lead to 33 points after three quarters from 8 at halftime on the way to their sixth victory in a row, 104-73.

Once again, San Antonio is flying high with its veteran Big Three of Parker, Duncan and Manu Ginobili leading the way, and again the Spurs are in the midst of a challenging stretch during which they will play six games in nine days, including four in five nights.

That raises an obvious question: will Popovich be inclined to rest his aging stars again?

At the end of November, he drew national attention by resting four of his top players  the Big Three and Danny Green  for a nationally televised matchup in Miami against the Heat, even flying them back to San Antonio before the game was played. The Spurs were fined $250,000 by N.B.A. Commissioner David Stern, who said they had done a disservice to the league and our fans.

Despite the punishment, Popovich made clear that he did not regret giving his players a game off, and said that he might do it again.

Im just going to do what Ive been doing for 16, 17 years, whatever it is, Popovich said before the Spurs victory over Dallas on Sunday. Im mostly concerned with the health and safety of my players, especially the ones who are a little bit older. And when they need rest, Im going to give it to them.

He added: A lot of circumstances have to converge to sit two or three players on a given night. And it has to do with their bodies, how many hits theyve taken, what the schedule is, all those things.

Popovich said he thought the N.B.A. was going to establish guidelines to govern what coaches should and should not do when confronted with an onslaught of games in a condensed period of time, but has not heard anything. The Spurs have gone 12-4 since Stern fined them, following a 13-4 start.

If youre playing four games in five nights and you need to rest somebody, I think that thats a call that Ill make if I need to do that, he said. Ive done it before and Ill do it again, Im sure.

Actually, excluding the controversial game in Miami, the Spurs three stars have missed only four games combined this season. Duncan has played in every game except the one in Miami.

If San Antonio remains healthy and continues to win at its current clip, the Duncan/Parker/Ginobili Spurs will by the end of the season trail only the Celtics of Larry Bird, Robert Parish and Kevin McHale and the Lakers of Magic Johnson, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and Michael Cooper in games won with the same three players in the lineup.

The Spurs were first in the N.B.A. in assists, second in points and fifth in offensive rating going into Mondays game. Six Spurs were shooting career highs from the free-throw line, Parker and Duncan among them.

So one might say that Popovich rests his case.