When Time magazine first asked Henry Grossman to photograph the Beatles, at their American television debut on The Ed Sullivan Show in February 1964, he thought of it as just another assignment  a journey into the realm of teenage fads, and less exciting than the sessions he had done with world leaders, actors and opera singers. Mr. Grossman, who was 27 at the time, preferred classical music; at 76, he still shoots production photos for the Metropolitan Opera.

Pictures from the Beatles Sullivan show appearances are plentiful, but Mr. Grossman found unusual angles that provide a context missing from the most familiar photographs. For example, a previously unseen long shot, included in Places I Remember, an opulent new limited-edition book of Mr. Grossmans Beatles photos, shows the groups amplifiers  usually placed directly behind them, but unseen in the broadcasts  set up at the side of the stage, well out of camera range. All the camera positions can be seen as well.

There were dozens of photographers there, all shooting exactly the same thing, but Henry caught views of the room that wed never seen before, said Brian Kehew, a recording engineer and musician who is currently touring with the Who as a keyboard technician, and who is also half of Curvebender, the publisher of Mr. Grossmans book.

He shot from the back of the balcony, and captured a sense of the theaters size. And he went around behind the Beatles to shoot the photographers who were shooting them, which tells us a lot about the atmosphere of the day.

The Sullivan show performance did not make Mr. Grossman a Beatles fan, but when he covered the group again, during its American tour that summer, he became friendly with George Harrison.

After that, Mr. Grossman said over lunch recently, anytime I went to London, Id check into my hotel, call their office to find out Georges phone number du jour  they had to change them, because the fans would find them out  and Id arrange to spend a day with them. Often, I was in Europe to shoot something else, and I didnt have a Beatles-related assignment.

Between 1964 and 1968, Mr. Grossman took more than 7,000 photos of the Beatles, though only a few dozen  whatever editors needed for the articles at hand  were published at the time. The best-known is a formal portrait from February 1967, showing the band members before a blue backdrop, sporting mustaches (new at the time) and flowery clothes. Shot for Life magazine, it has become a ubiquitous poster. But Mr. Grossman rarely printed the unused pictures from his sessions and never thought to exploit them.

Probably for that reason, Mr. Grossman is rarely listed among the photographers most closely associated with the Beatles: a group that includes Astrid Kirchherr and Jrgen Vollmer, known for their gritty shots of the leather-clad Beatles during their early years in Hamburg; Dezo Hoffmann and Robert Freeman, who photographed them frequently in the early middle years of their career; and Robert Whitaker, who staged avant-garde shoots, including one that produced the quickly withdrawn Butcher cover (which showed the group in butcher smocks, draped in pieces of meat and decapitated baby dolls) for the Yesterday and Today LP.

Places I Remember may help change that. A boxed 528-page, silver-edged brick of a volume that weighs 15 pounds, includes about 1,000 photographs and costs $495 (or $795 for one of the first 250 copies, signed by Mr. Grossman, in an edition of 1,200), it is Mr. Grossmans second book. In 2008 Curvebender published Kaleidoscope Eyes, another $495 limited edition, which documents in fine detail (and about 220 frames) an evening recording session for Lucy in the Sky With Diamonds.

Mr. Kehew and his partner at Curvebender, Kevin Ryan, discovered Mr. Grossmans stash of images while researching their own 2006 book, Recording the Beatles, an intricate examination of the Abbey Road Studios and how the Beatles created their music. Searching for pictures of the band, they found a copy of Life magazine with some of Mr. Grossmans photos from the Lucy session.

We licensed two of them for our book, Mr. Ryan said, but we knew there had to more from that session, so we visited Henry in hope of seeing the rest of the images on that roll of film. As it turned out, he had taken 10 rolls that evening, which was mind-blowing. So we asked if he had other Beatles photos, and he went into his studio and came back with a stack of contact sheets 10 inches high.

As Beatles specialists, Mr. Kehew and Mr. Ryan thought they had seen it all, but they were astonished by the depth of Mr. Grossmans archives.

They knew much more about it than I did, Mr. Grossman said. We were looking through pictures I took at John Lennons house, and Kevin said, Oh my God  John used to say that he often sat in front of the television with the sound down, composing on his guitar, and here youve got it.