In its home opener in 2005, the Central Florida football team ended a 17-game losing streak with an upset of Marshall. Fans swarmed the field and, in a time-honored tradition, tore down one of the goal posts at the Florida Citrus Bowl in Orlando.

Although no fans were hurt in the celebration, Allen Johnson, the executive director of Orlando Venues, which runs the stadium, soon began looking for a way to avoid a potentially dangerous situation. A solution was a goal post that, with the push of a button, sinks to the ground in less than a minute, using a hydraulic hinge at the base.

Built by Sportsfield Specialties in Delhi, N.Y., about a three-hour drive north of New York City, the 500-pound aluminum posts not only frustrate fans intent on tearing them down, but also are easier for the stadium staff to repair and remove for concerts and other events. The posts can rotate away from the field so soccer and field hockey games can be held, and they expand for high school and college football games, which require posts with different goal widths.

Theyre very versatile, Johnson said of the posts, which cost about $13,000 a pair. Theyre safer, quicker and more economical.

Fans can see this increasingly ubiquitous style of goal post on Tuesday when the Florida Citrus Bowl hosts the Capital One Bowl. The posts are also used at MetLife Stadium, where the Jets and the Giants play, and at University of Phoenix Stadium, the Arizona Cardinals home field. They will be installed in the future home of the San Francisco 49ers, among many other sites.

The collapsible goal posts have been around for only a few years. But they are just the latest in a long list of updates and innovations to a cornerstone of every football field, whether the old two-post steel standard on the goal line or the single aluminum post placed behind the end zone.

Goal posts are just one of the hundreds of products that manufacturers like Sportsfield make for sports facilities. These companies produce things like padding, netting, dugouts, bleachers, portable pitching mounds and steeplechase pits. Fans may barely give them a thought, but these products are continually being tweaked to adapt to changing needs, tight budgets and growing safety concerns.

Nothing we make is perfect, but we constantly look to improve it, said Tim Driscoll, the president of AAE in Royersford, Pa., which introduced the first rollaway goal posts decades ago. The one constant is change in this business.

Estimates vary, but the market for equipment for sports facilities is worth roughly $100 million, with Sportsfield, Gilman Gear and AAE among the leaders in an industry dominated by small, family-run companies. Sales over all have remained steady in recent years despite a downturn in new school construction and pressure on municipal and college sports budgets, the companies said.

Donations, particularly at universities, have helped. Oklahoma State, for instance, overhauled its sports facilities after T. Boone Pickens, an alumnus and an oil tycoon, donated hundreds of millions of dollars. Schools are also expanding their programs in sports like lacrosse and soccer even as they shut down less popular and more expensive programs.

Schools have had to make choices in everything from curriculum to what sports they offer and decide where the greatest demand and return is, said Jack Plunkett, the chief executive of Plunkett Research, a market research firm in Houston.

The need to contain costs has led manufacturers to create new products. Instead of building new fields, for instance, some schools are installing netting systems that divide existing fields in half so two teams can practice simultaneously. Artificial fields, too, are replacing natural grass fields because they do not need to be mowed or seeded.

Whats driving the market is the need for efficiency and a reduction in labor, said Neil Gilman, the president of Gilman Gear, who said his company introduced the first manually operated hinged posts.

Hinged goal posts increase productivity because up to four people may be needed to remove a fixed goal post, and injuries are always a risk. Workers use ladders to unbolt uprights from the crossbars and then lower the poles, which can be as long as 30 feet. The gooseneck, which weighs about 150 pounds, must be unscrewed as well.

Only two people are needed to disassemble hinged posts, and they can do the job faster.