To lighten the mood of the Giants seasons eulogy, Tom Coughlin sprinkled a few well-intended quips into his coachs 2012 assessment  but Billy Crystal he is not. General Manager Jerry Reese, next to the podium, added, Wish I had something clever to say, but we didnt get the job done.

Typical Giants, in button-down blue. For inspired rhetoric or slapstick, we would have had to venture a few miles west of East Rutherford, to Florham Park, where the Jets were also bidding us adieu. But after announcing the removal of General Manager Mike Tannenbaum on Monday morning, they mysteriously canceled Coach Rex Ryans scheduled late afternoon meeting with reporters.

Let the speculation reign and the headlines roll.

There will be no playoff football played by either New York-area team, but in keeping with the behavioral patterns of the respective organizations, the Giants could at least point to and rue a handful of plays in explaining their failure to earn an opportunity to defend their Super Bowl title.

Meanwhile, the Jets finished as they started, a bleating ensemble of confusion bordering on chaos.

With the exception of most Sundays, it is difficult to argue that they didnt provide first-rate entertainment, even if they  an 8-8 study in mediocrity last season, devolving to a 6-10 train Rex  never deserved the equal and sometimes superior billing they got with their MetLife Stadium co-tenant. If Tim Tebow was  as many have postulated  the owner Woody Johnsons trophy acquisition to counter the Giants Super Bowl hardware, consider that marketing a rousing success.

The Jets sold counterfeit quarterback chronicles that we  especially the New York news media  bought hook, line and laptop. Marginally talented and mostly tethered to the sideline, Tebow somehow drew more attention than Eli Manning, a two-time Super Bowl most valuable player, whose admittedly uneven performance this season was certainly worthy of weekly dissection.

There has always been a pecking order in the coverage of the crowded New York sports market, based not only on location (Knicks over Nets) but often on performance (Yankees over Mets).

During Ryans first two years that produced successive trips to the A.F.C. Championship game, much was made by him and others of how the Jets had taken ownership of the real estate. Then there was a fateful Giants-Jets meeting last season, the day before Christmas, when everything Ryan had worked for was spectacularly reversed in the blink of Victor Cruzs bursting into the clear.

Yes, the Giants gave every indication that there was no point in worrying about them this season  not until the playoffs  by storming out to a three-game divisional lead. And Ryans Jets were that difficult-to-miss distraction, the figurative brawl breaking out in a high school cafeteria.

Still, there was something disquieting about how effective they were at commanding the spotlight with their nonsense narratives, with their Wildcat formation that never really was, and with Ryans bluster that belied so much early evidence that his playmaker-challenged team was going to be no good.

The fact that were picked fourth in our division or third by some  really? he said on the day the Jets convened for summer camp in upstate New York. Really, they finished tied for third and fourth with Buffalo, one of seven N.F.L. teams to fire their coaches on Monday.

With Tannenbaum out and Tony Sparano likely to become the second offensive coordinator thrown under the bus in two years, Ryan may not coach forever but he should have a fine future as a contestant on Survivor. And with Tebow all but gone, the Jets should be able to restock the gossip columns for a year or two by forcing the new general manager to play nice with Ryan whether he thinks Ryan is a good coach or not. Good luck to them.

Back in the Giants locker room, the defensive end Justin Tuck nodded when it was suggested to him that reporters were obsessed with Ryans Jets and should have known from the start that they were just a competitive tease.

I could have told you that, he said, laughing. But honestly, we dont care about the attention they got. We hope the Jets continue to get all the headlines. It makes things a lot simpler for us.

You know, some teams kind of relish being in the spotlight. Our spotlight comes from winning football games.

In the most simple of final analyses, the Giants didnt win enough games despite finishing with the same record, 9-7, as last season. We got away with it last year, Reese said, referring to that ever-shifting line of N.F.L. success for teams not at the competitive extremes.

There are no guarantees, but the Giants, unlike the Jets, do have the organizational stability and blueprint for success, and a proven quarterback.

Manning said he would most regret the road loss to Washington, when the Giants could have put Robert Griffin III and his divisional upstarts away. Coughlin also mentioned that game, along with blowing a 10-point lead in the fourth quarter at home to Pittsburgh and losing at Philadelphia, where Mannings decision to throw long when already close enough for a winning field goal attempt resulted in a damning offensive-pass-interference call.

Given that the Giants were fortunate to salvage a late victory over the Redskins at home, losing to the Eagles should probably haunt them the most.

At least the season is far from over for the family Manning. After doubling Peytons Super Bowl ring total last February, Eli said he would now root for Peyton, who is trying to author one of the great comeback stories in Denver. Think of what the brothers have achieved in recent years and then about how much we all were fixated these past few months on Tebow, Mark Sanchez and Greg McElroy.