At the start of the season, Southern California was ranked No. 1, and Matt Barkley was a strong contender for the Heisman Trophy. Just a few months later, the Trojans year ended with Barkley on the sideline for a loss to Georgia Tech in the Sun Bowl.

Tevin Washington threw a touchdown pass and ran for another score to lead the Yellow Jackets to a 21-7 victory on Monday in El Paso.

Washingtons 1-yard touchdown run early in the third quarter gave Georgia Tech a 14-7 lead, and he found Orwin Smith for a 17-yard touchdown pass early in the fourth.

Barkley, the first three-time captain in U.S.C.s history, injured his right shoulder in a loss to U.C.L.A. in November and was not cleared to play. His replacement, Max Wittek, tossed a 9-yard touchdown pass to Silas Redd in the second quarter, but he also threw three interceptions.

The Trojans (7-6) struggled to contain Georgia Techs triple-option attack. The Yellow Jackets (7-7) rushed for 294 yards on 63 carries while stopping a seven-bowl losing streak.

U.S.C. became the first Associated Press preseason No. 1 team to lose six games. Its all but assured of being the first program to enter the season on top of the poll and finish unranked since Mississippi in 1964.

We cant be 7-6, Trojans Coach Lane Kiffin said. Thats not U.S.C., and thats not our expectations. Thats not why we came here. Obviously, we have some work here to get that fixed.

Even if wed won this game, wed still be very disappointed in this season. Its well below our standards.

CLEMSON 25, L.S.U. 24 Chandler Catanzaro kicked a 37-yard field goal as time expired to give No. 14 Clemson (11-2) a wild win over No. 9 Louisiana State (10-3) in the Chick-fil-A Bowl in Atlanta.

Trailing by 24-22, Clemson took possession at its 20 with 1 minute 39 seconds remaining. Tajh Boyd completed a pass for 26 yards to DeAndre Hopkins on a fourth-and-16 play to extend the decisive 10-play drive.

Hopkins, who had 13 catches for 191 yards and 2 touchdowns, also had receptions for 7 and 13 yards and drew a pass-interference penalty on the final drive. TULSA 31, IOWA STATE 17 Trey Watts rushed for 149 yards, Alex Singleton ran for three scores, and Tulsa avenged a season-opening loss to Iowa State with a victory in a rainy Liberty Bowl in Memphis.

The Golden Hurricane (11-3) posted the second 11-win season in team history. Tulsa, which has the smallest enrollment of any Football Bowl Subdivision program, also finished 11-3 in 2008.

Iowa State (6-7) rallied to beat Tulsa, 38-23, on Sept. 1, but the Golden Hurricane put together the comeback in the rematch. Tulsa trailed, 17-7, at the end of the first quarter.

VANDERBILT 38, N.C. STATE 24 Jordan Rodgers threw two touchdown passes and ran for another score as Vanderbilt capped its best season since 1915 by defeating North Carolina State in the Music City Bowl in Nashville.

The Commodores finished 9-4, their best record since going 9-1 in 1915. This season was the third time Vanderbilt, the Southeastern Conferences smallest university, had won nine games.

BOISE ST. BACKS OUT OF BIG EAST Boise State has backed out on a commitment to join the Big East and will remain a member of the Mountain West in 2013.

Boise State left the Western Athletic Conference for the Mountain West after the 2010 season. The Broncos were scheduled to join the Big East next season for football only; Boise States other sports were going to compete in the Big West.

But more recent defections from the Big East made Boise State reconsider. And the Broncos were able to cut a deal with the Mountain West that could allow Boise State to cash in on its popular football program.